# Kneat
A Kotlin implementation of the NEAT (Neuroevolution of Augmenting Topologies) 
algorithm developed by Kenneth O. Stanley. This project is heavily based off of https://github.com/CodeReclaimers/neat-python
and wouldn't be here without them. 

<span style="color:red">**This library is currently under construction. It's being actively worked on; but some features and functionality may be broken or unavailable.**</span>

## Usage

Because this library is currently under construction, the only way to implement it is by building the source directly. 
This will change in the near future and ideally a maven repository will be available.

### Configuration

### Pipeline

### Genes

### Genomes

### Species

### Reproduction

### Stagnation / Culling

### Evaluation
TODO: Mention that evaluation may be done across different sessions due to the nature of the pipeline

### Reporting

### Networks

### Asynchronicity
TODO: Mention how the library is parallel by default
TODO: Neural Networks generated by this are executed asynchronously

## Examples


# Beginner / Hobbyist Resources
Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence can be a bit inaccessible to beginner developers and 
hobbyists due to the current "academic" nature of the topic. Machine learning as a discipline is still
relatively new (to the average population) and continues to remain in flux as solutions to problems are 
identified.

To make this library a little more friendly to beginners, I've included a section here for concepts that
may be unfamiliar so that 1. You may have some context for what's going on "under the hood" and 2. It will
hopefully give you a good base level of knowledge so you can begin researching the topics you're less
familiar with. It's hard to know what you don't know, so hopefully this will help.

If you have any suggestions for content for this section, please feel free to make an issue or a Pull Request
to add it. 

## Terminology 

> ### Neural Networks
> _In biology, a Neural Network is an interconnected network of "neurons", or cells that can send signals
> to each other, that facilitate things from muscle movement to complex thought; a human brain is just a
> ver (VERY!) large neural network. Computational Neural Networks are an approximation of biological neural
> networks; but, instead of being made out of biological material, they're simulated on a computer. For more
> information about the similarities and differences between Biological Neural Networks and Computational 
> neural networks, see the "Neural Network" article in the "Concepts" section below_


> ### Nodes
> _Nodes and Neurons can be used interchangeably when referring to a computational neural network. A node
> is simply a simulated neuron in the computational neural network._ 


> ### Connections
> _Connections in a computational neural network are analogous to Axons and Dendrites in a biological 
> neural network; or, more simply, the way two neurons send information to each other._


> ### Problem / Solution Domain
> _A problem domain is just a fancy way of saying that the problem we're solving is a use-case
> specific to the area of expertise / technology we're working with. For example, if I were to
> train a Neural Network to classify flowers, the problem domain would be flower classification.
> The solution domain would be the criteria that's been established for what a valid solution to
> the problem domain is. So, for the flower classification example, a valid solution domain could
> be that we can identify if a flower is a Dandelion or not a Dandelion._


> ### Gene
> _In biology, a Gene is a segment of DNA that controls a certain aspect or functionality
> of a biological system (like the human body). The NEAT algorithm uses a similar concept
> to manage different attributes or functionality of a part of a Neural Network._


> ### Attribute
> _Attributes are values controlled by Genes that controls how different parts of the Neural Network behaves._


> ### Genome
> _In biology, a Genome is an organism's complete set of DNA; or all genes for an organism. This is the same
> for this library; a Genome is the entire genetic makeup that describes the behavior of a Neural Network._


> ### Species
> _In biology, a species is a group of organisms that share enough genetic information with each other
> to allow them to interbreed or exchange genetic information. This is the same for this library.
> Genomes with similar genetic makeup are grouped together so that we can determine which groups
> of Genomes are doing well at solving a problem (fittest) and which are doing poorly._


> ### Speciation
> _Speciation is the method in which we group a population (set of individuals) into specific species.
> In biology, this is happens as a result of mutations leading to such different populations that they
> can no longer interbreed. This library is configurable to allow you to change what "genetically similar"
> means._


> ### Reproduction
> _In biology, reproduction is the method individuals in a population exchange genetic information to create
> new members for the population. This library works the same way, but is configurable to allow you to change
> specific behaviors of reproduction._


> ### Stagnation
> _In biology, if a species cannot adapt to its environment it will eventually die out and go extinct.
> This library works in a similar way and will "cull" or selectively kill off species that fail to
> improve over a certain number of generations._


> ### Activation Functions
> _In biological neural networks, a Neuron "fires" when it receives a sufficient enough stimulus. This 
> "firing" or sometimes called a "nerve impulse" then provides stimulus to other neurons._ How much 
> _stimulus it requires for a neuron to fire is (in a hyper-simplified explanation) how a Neuron "stores"
> information. Part of this process in a computational neural network is achieved with an Activation Function.
> An activation function is a mathematical function that takes in a value and, depending on the value, emits
> a new value. The number passed into the function is essentially the stimulus and the value returned by the
> function indicates how "strong" of an impulse the next Node (Neuron) receives._


> ### Aggregation Functions
> _In biological neural networks, many neurons "connect" to each other and all of their combined outputs 
> affect how strong the stimulus is that the receiving neuron receives. In computational neural networks,
> we generally work with numbers as stimulus, so we need a way for these numbers to be "combined" so that 
> we can feed it into our activation function. This "combination" or "aggregation" is a mathematical function 
> applied to all of the numbers to produce a single value. The most common of this that you may be familiar with 
> is an "average". Essentially, all values are added together and then divided by the total amount of numbers. This
> gives an approximation for what the "average" number is in the list and also happens to be an aggregation
> function. There are many other aggregation functions that we may use, each having a different effect on 
> how neurons in the network behave._


> ### Pipeline
> _A "Pipeline" in context of this library is your entry point into the NEAT algorithm. It facilitates
> the portions of the algorithm for you so you only have to worry about configuration to get a 
> neural network that works for your problem domain._

## Concepts

### Neural Networks

### The NEAT algorithm

## Mathematics


# Planned Enhancements

- Add annotation processing for attributes with commonly invalid configuration values
- Allow configuration for the asynchronous portions of the library
- Allow for "Real Time" training
- Explore adding HyperNEAT capability
- Distributed learning for systems to learn individually and contribute to the whole
- Allow configuration of refractory periods for neurons like biological networks
- Support publishing to maven
- Support a CI/CD Pipeline
- Add tests for all files (Ideally 100% tested if possible)



